IndicTrans2 5K LoRA Evaluation
============================================================

Samples: 100
Batch size: 4
Beams: 1
Max new tokens: 64

BASE MODEL
BLEU: 1.4553
chrF: 19.0451

5K LoRA MODEL
BLEU: 1.9095
chrF: 22.3827

CHANGE
BLEU: +0.4541
chrF: +3.3376

============================================================
SAMPLE TRANSLATIONS
============================================================

[1]
Sanskrit: kāma krodha vimuktānām yatīnām yata cetasām abhitaḥ brahma nirvāṇam vartate vidita ātmanām
Reference: Those who are free from anger and all material desires, who are self-realized, self-disciplined and constantly endeavoring for perfection, are assured of liberation in the Supreme in the very near future.
Base: " Kama is the liberation from anger, the liberation of the mind from anger. "
5K LoRA: The Kāma is the liberation from anger and the Yātīs. The Brahman is the purification of the conscious self.

[2]
Sanskrit: sparśān kṛtvā bahiḥ bāhyān cakṣuḥ ca eva antare bhruvoḥ prāṇa apānau samau kṛtvā nāsa abhyantara cāriṇau yata indriya manaḥ buddhiḥ muniḥ mokṣa parāyaṇaḥ vigata icchā bhaya krodhaḥ yaḥ sadā muktaḥ eva saḥ
Reference: Shutting out all external sense objects, keeping the eyes and vision concentrated between the two eyebrows, suspending the inward and outward breaths within the nostrils, and thus controlling the mind, senses and intelligence, the transcendentalist aiming at liberation becomes free from desire, fear and anger. One who is always in this state is certainly liberated.
Base: " And when he hath touched, he hid from the outside the outer eye, and from the inside the inner eye the soul of the brother, and hath not taken it in, but hath cleansed the inner body, and the mind, and senses, and mind, the sage,
5K LoRA: Having touched the outer parts of the body with the eyes and the inner parts with the breath of the forefathers the inner part of the mind should be covered with the inner and inner parts. The sage should be aware of the sensory mind the intellect the mind and the mind and the desire

[3]
Sanskrit: bhoktāram yajña tapasām sarva loka mahā īśvaram su hṛdam sarva bhūtānām jñātvā mām śāntim ṛcchati
Reference: A person in full consciousness of Me, knowing Me to be the ultimate beneficiary of all sacrifices and austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods, and the benefactor and well-wisher of all living entities, attains peace from the pangs of material miseries.
Base: " And when I shall have worshipped him, I will pray him that he may give me peace, that he might know the great God, and that he himself may know the devils of my heart. "
5K LoRA: The devotee should offer sacrifices and perform penance. The great lord of all the worlds should know the heart and all the demons. He gives me peace.

[4]
Sanskrit: śrī bhagavān uvāca anāśritaḥ karma phalam kāryam karma karoti yaḥ saḥ sannyāsī ca yogī ca na niḥ agniḥ na ca akriyaḥ
Reference: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: One who is unattached to the fruits of his work and who works as he is obligated is in the renounced order of life, and he is the true mystic, not he who lights no fire and performs no duty.
Base: " Shri Bhagwan said, " " The fruit of unshrinking action is action, that is, the ascetic and yogi who is neither fire nor fire. " " "
5K LoRA: The lord Śrī said The one who performs the karma and the fruits of the kām and the kṛmā is a sannyāṣī and a yogin. He neither consummates nor consummats the fire.

[5]
Sanskrit: yam sannyāsam iti prāhuḥ yogam tam viddhi pāṇḍava na hi asannyasta saṅkalpaḥ yogī bhavati kaścana
Reference: What is called renunciation you should know to be the same as yoga, or linking oneself with the Supreme, O son of Pāṇḍu, for one can never become a yogī unless he renounces the desire for sense gratification.
Base: " Yama, sannyasa, yogic practice, is the practice of the unformed concept of yogin, not of the Pandava. "
5K LoRA: The yānaṣya is the practice of renunciation. The yogīna is the concept of the unbroken concept of Pandava.

[6]
Sanskrit: ārurukṣoḥ muneḥ yogam karma kāraṇam ucyate yoga ārūḍhasya tasya eva śamaḥ kāraṇam ucyate
Reference: For one who is a neophyte in the eightfold yoga system, work is said to be the means; and for one who is already elevated in yoga, cessation of all material activities is said to be the means.
Base: " The reason for the beginning of yoga is called the cause of Karma, "
5K LoRA: The yogic cause of the arruksha is called the cause of action. The yoga is called as the cause for the rise of the yogis.

[7]
Sanskrit: yadā hi na indriya artheṣu na karmasu anuṣajjate sarva saṅkalpa sannyāsī yoga ārūḍhaḥ tadā ucyate
Reference: A person is said to be elevated in yoga when, having renounced all material desires, he neither acts for sense gratification nor engages in fruitive activities.
Base: " When he has attained the ascetic yoga of all the concepts, not the sense sense, not action, "
5K LoRA: When he has not attained the sensory meaning or the sense sense or the sensual sense or has attained the sense of action the sannyāsīna sannyasi starts the yoga.

[8]
Sanskrit: uddharet ātmanā ātmānam na ātmānam avasādayet ātmā eva hi ātmanaḥ bandhuḥ ātmā eva ripuḥ ātmanaḥ
Reference: One must deliver himself with the help of his mind, and not degrade himself. The mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as well.
Base: " For the Spirit is not the soul, but the spirit : the Spirit, the friend of the self, the spirit, the repentance of the soul. "
5K LoRA: The spirit should not be taken away by the spirit. The spirit itself should not depress the spirit itself. The soul itself should be the friend of the self. The self itself should become the vice of the soul.

[9]
Sanskrit: bandhuḥ ātmā ātmanaḥ tasya yena ātmā eva ātmanā jitaḥ anātmanaḥ tu śatrutve varteta ātmā eva śatru vat
Reference: For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of friends; but for one who has failed to do so, his mind will remain the greatest enemy.
Base: " Friend is the soul, the self, the soul is the enemy of the self. "
5K LoRA: The friend is the self the soul the self and the soul is the enemy.

[10]
Sanskrit: jita ātmanaḥ praśāntasya parama ātmā samāhitaḥ śīta uṣṇa sukha duḥkheṣu tathā māna apamānayoḥ
Reference: For one who has conquered the mind, the Supersoul is already reached, for he has attained tranquillity. To such a man happiness and distress, heat and cold, honor and dishonor are all the same.
Base: " Jita Atman : One who is the supreme Self of peace, cool, warm, happy, sad and humbled. "
5K LoRA: The supreme self of the victorious self is the supreme self which is endowed with peace cool warm happy sad honor and dishonour.

[11]
Sanskrit: jñāna vijñāna tṛpta ātmā kūṭa sthaḥ vijita indriyaḥ yuktaḥ iti ucyate yogī sama loṣṭra aśma kāñcanaḥ
Reference: A person is said to be established in self-realization and is called a yogī [or mystic] when he is fully satisfied by virtue of acquired knowledge and realization. Such a person is situated in transcendence and is self-controlled. He sees everything – whether it be pebbles, stones or gold – as the same.
Base: " Jnana-vigyanah : One who is endowed with knowledge, knowledge, wisdom, knowledge and wisdom. "
5K LoRA: The yogī is said to possess the sense organs and to possess knowledge and knowledge.

[12]
Sanskrit: su hṛt mitra ari udāsīna madhya stha dveṣya bandhuṣu sādhuṣu api ca pāpeṣu sama buddhiḥ viśiṣyate
Reference: A person is considered still further advanced when he regards honest well-wishers, affectionate benefactors, the neutral, mediators, the envious, friends and enemies, the pious and the sinners all with an equal mind.
Base: " And in the midst of the heart of thee is friendship, and in the middle of indifference, and understanding of the two brethren, and of the saints, and sins ; "
5K LoRA: The heart should be in the middle of the heart the heart should remain in the heart and the mind should be divided between the two friends the sages and the sins.

[13]
Sanskrit: yogī yuñjīta satatam ātmānam rahasi sthitaḥ ekākī yata citta ātmā nirāśīḥ aparigrahaḥ
Reference: A transcendentalist should always engage his body, mind and self in relationship with the Supreme; he should live alone in a secluded place and should always carefully control his mind. He should be free from desires and feelings of possessiveness.
Base: " In the yogic yogis, the soul is always in the secret, the mind is alone, the spirit is in despair, and the grace is imperishable. "
5K LoRA: The yogī is always in the union of the yogis. The spirit is in the secret. The mind is alone. The soul is in despair. The unbroken grace is there.

[14]
Sanskrit: śucau deśe pratiṣṭhāpya sthiram āsanam ātmanaḥ na ati ucchritam na ati nīcam caila ajina kuśa uttaram tatra eka agram manaḥ kṛtvā yata citta indriya kriyaḥ upaviśya āsane yuñjyāt yogam ātma viśuddhaye
Reference: To practice yoga, one should go to a secluded place and should lay kuśa grass on the ground and then cover it with a deerskin and a soft cloth. The seat should be neither too high nor too low and should be situated in a sacred place. The yogī should then sit on it very firmly and practice yoga to purify the heart by controlling his mind, senses and activities and fixing the mind on one point.
Base: " And set him in a clean place, and sit in a stable posture : neither too loud nor too low for the soul : but sit there on your knees, and meditate on one of the four corners of your mind, and do all your mental and sensory work. "
5K LoRA: Having placed the seat in the country of purification the seat should be fixed in the seat of the self. The seat should neither be too high nor too low. The position should be placed in the north of the body. Having meditated on the seat with the mind and the sense organs sitting in the chair

[15]
Sanskrit: samam kāya śiraḥ grīvam dhārayan acalam sthiraḥ samprekṣya nāsikā agram svam diśaḥ ca anavalokayan praśānta ātmā vigata bhīḥ brahmacāri vrate sthitaḥ manaḥ saṁyamya mat cittaḥ yuktaḥ āsīta mat paraḥ
Reference: One should hold one’s body, neck and head erect in a straight line and stare steadily at the tip of the nose. Thus, with an unagitated, subdued mind, devoid of fear, completely free from sex life, one should meditate upon Me within the heart and make Me the ultimate goal of life.
Base: " And he stood still, and held his head and neck, and opened his nostrils, and his mouth, and looked toward himself, and the spirit was at peace, and he was in the past celibate fast, and made his mind to pass through. "
5K LoRA: Having made the head equal to the neck and having fixed the neck on the head and having drawn the nostrils in the direction of the forehead and the direction in which it is located the spirit who is past the celestial body and the mind standing in the vrat should be made ready.

[16]
Sanskrit: yuñjan evam sadā ātmānam yogī niyata mānasaḥ śāntim nirvāṇa paramām mat saṁsthām adhigacchati
Reference: Thus practicing constant control of the body, mind and activities, the mystic transcendentalist, his mind regulated, attains to the kingdom of God [or the abode of Kṛṣṇa] by cessation of material existence.
Base: " For the same way the Spirit always endures the yogi, the appointed mind, the peace of mind, and the perfection of the Supreme Self, "
5K LoRA: The yogī always attains the self the mind and the mind. The supreme state of nirvana attains peace and attainment.

[17]
Sanskrit: na ati aśnataḥ tu yogaḥ asti na ca ekāntam anaśnataḥ na ca ati svapna śīlasya jāgrataḥ na eva ca arjuna
Reference: There is no possibility of one’s becoming a yogī, O Arjuna, if one eats too much or eats too little, sleeps too much or does not sleep enough.
Base: " Neither too much sleep, nor loneliness, nor sleep, neither sleep, sleep, wake, sleep and sleep, "
5K LoRA: There is no yoga for the sake of the extreme and the lonely the cause of the unspeakable the meaning of the dream the awareness of the illusion the awakening of Arjuna.

[18]
Sanskrit: yukta āhāra vihārasya yukta ceṣṭasya karmasu yukta svapna avabodhasya yogaḥ bhavati duḥkha hā
Reference: He who is regulated in his habits of eating, sleeping, recreation and work can mitigate all material pains by practicing the yoga system.
Base: " Yukta, aahar, vihara, yukta ( effort ), karma, kriyas ( deeds ), yog ( realization ), sadhana ( sorrow ), "
5K LoRA: The sum of the actions of the mind and the dream and the awareness of the heart is the sum of sorrow.

[19]
Sanskrit: yadā viniyatam cittam ātmani eva avatiṣṭhate nispṛhaḥ sarva kāmebhyaḥ yuktaḥ iti ucyate tadā
Reference: When the yogī, by practice of yoga, disciplines his mental activities and becomes situated in transcendence – devoid of all material desires – he is said to be well established in yoga.
Base: " When the mind is nothing, and the spirit is nothing ; when the mind, being nothing, is nothing. "
5K LoRA: When the mind is unyielding and the self is unshakable it is said to be capable of all actions.

[20]
Sanskrit: yathā dīpaḥ nivāta sthaḥ na iṅgate sā upamā smṛtā yoginaḥ yata cittasya yuñjataḥ yogam ātmanaḥ
Reference: As a lamp in a windless place does not waver, so the transcendentalist, whose mind is controlled, remains always steady in his meditation on the transcendent Self.
Base: " And the yogis remembered the parable, How a lamp cannot be put out, for the mind is the same as the soul. "
5K LoRA: The yogis remembered the analogy of the union of the mind with the self as if the lamp had been put out and the soul had not been placed.

[21]
Sanskrit: yatra uparamate cittam niruddham yoga sevayā yatra ca eva ātmanā ātmānam paśyan ātmani tuṣyati sukham ātyantikam yat tat buddhi grāhyam atīndriyam vetti yatra na ca eva ayam sthitaḥ calati tattvataḥ yam labdhvā ca aparam lābham manyate na adhikam tataḥ yasmin sthitaḥ na duḥkhena guruṇā api vicālyate tam vidyāt duḥkha saṁyoga viyogam yoga saṁjñitam
Reference: In the stage of perfection called trance, or samādhi, one’s mind is completely restrained from material mental activities by practice of yoga. This perfection is characterized by one’s ability to see the Self by the pure mind and to relish and rejoice in the Self. In that joyous state, one is situated in boundless transcendental happiness, realized through transcendental senses. Established thus, one never departs from the truth, and upon gaining this he thinks there is no greater gain. Being situated in such a position, one is never shaken, even in the midst of greatest difficulty. This indeed is actual freedom from all miseries arising from material contact.
Base: " Wherever the mind is restrained by the above belief, by the yogic service, wherever the soul sees the self, the self will be destroyed. Happiness is the ultimate, that which the intellect perceives, the innermost, where it is not, what it has acquired from the moving element, what
5K LoRA: Wherever the mind is restrained by the above belief by the yogic service the soul is destroyed by the self. The mind which is the ultimate and which is considered to be the innermost and which has no place in the inner sense. The other benefits are obtained by the principle of movement and is not

[22]
Sanskrit: saḥ niścayena yoktavyaḥ yogaḥ anirviṇṇa cetasā saṅkalpa prabhavān kāmān tyaktvā sarvān aśeṣataḥ manasā eva indriya grāmam viniyamya samantataḥ
Reference: One should engage oneself in the practice of yoga with determination and faith and not be deviated from the path. One should abandon, without exception, all material desires born of mental speculation and thus control all the senses on all sides by the mind.
Base: " And he said unto them, Yoga, the absence of mind, the lack of consciousness, the excess of desire, the emptiness of the mind, and the absence from the village of the senses, "
5K LoRA: He said the yogic practice with certainty without ceasing to be conscious having left the preceptor and the lustful one all the senses and the mind in the eternal village of senses.

[23]
Sanskrit: śanaiḥ śanaiḥ uparamet buddhyā dhṛti gṛhītayā ātma saṁstham manaḥ kṛtvā na kiñcit api cintayet
Reference: Gradually, step by step, one should become situated in trance by means of intelligence sustained by full conviction, and thus the mind should be fixed on the Self alone and should think of nothing else.
Base: " And slowly he lifted up his mind, and took hold of it, and gave himself to the task of doing it, not to think of any thing. "
5K LoRA: Having taken the spirit into the upper body with the mind gradually and holding it in the mind one should not think about anything after having thought of the attainment of the self.

[24]
Sanskrit: yataḥ yataḥ niścalati manaḥ cañcalam asthiram tataḥ tataḥ niyamya etat ātmani eva vaśam nayet
Reference: From wherever the mind wanders due to its flickering and unsteady nature, one must certainly withdraw it and bring it back under the control of the Self.
Base: " For when the mind is still, the mind faint, and the mind be not in control of the spirit : "
5K LoRA: For the mind is fixed. The mind is made to rest. Then the body is fixed and the self is not controlled.

[25]
Sanskrit: yuñjan evam sadā ātmānam yogī vigata kalmaṣaḥ sukhena brahma saṁsparśam atyantam sukham aśnute
Reference: Thus the self-controlled yogī, constantly engaged in yoga practice, becomes free from all material contamination and achieves the highest stage of perfect happiness in transcendental loving service to the Lord.
Base: " You all must always be a yogi of the Atman, and to touch the past Kalmas with Brahman and Sabhyam is a great happiness. "
5K LoRA: The yogī always attains the soul in the same way. The touch of the past abyss with the Brahman and the other abysmal elements is the greatest happiness.

[26]
Sanskrit: yaḥ mām paśyati sarvatra sarvam ca mayi paśyati tasya aham na praṇaśyāmi saḥ ca me na praṇaśyati
Reference: For one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am never lost, nor is he ever lost to Me.
Base: " He that seeth me, and seeeth me everywhere, him will I not worship ; and he that seest me not will I worship not. "
5K LoRA: He who sees me everywhere sees me in everything. He who does not see me has no respect for me. He does not respect me.

[27]
Sanskrit: sarva bhūta sthitam yaḥ mām bhajati ekatvam āsthitaḥ sarvathā vartamānaḥ api saḥ yogī mayi vartate
Reference: Such a yogī, who engages in the worshipful service of the Supersoul, knowing that I and the Supersoul are one, remains always in Me in all circumstances.
Base: " For all the spirits are in me, and he that worships me, the same being, the one who is present in all, and that yogi is in me. "
5K LoRA: The one who worships me is the one who is present in all the worlds and is present everywhere. The yogī is present with me.

[28]
Sanskrit: ātma aupamyena sarvatra samam paśyati yaḥ arjuna sukham vā yadi vā duḥkham saḥ yogī paramaḥ mataḥ
Reference: He is a perfect yogī who, by comparison to his own self, sees the true equality of all beings, in both their happiness and their distress, O Arjuna!
Base: " Arjuna, who sees the same everywhere in the self, is the ultimate yogi, whether he is happy or sad. "
5K LoRA: The yogī is the supreme one who sees the same everywhere by the manifestation of the self whether Arjuna is happy or sad.

[29]
Sanskrit: arjunaḥ uvāca yaḥ ayam yogaḥ tvayā proktaḥ sāmyena madhu sūdana etasya aham na paśyāmi cañcalatvāt sthitim sthirām
Reference: Arjuna said: O Madhusūdana, the system of yoga which You have summarized appears impractical and unendurable to me, for the mind is restless and unsteady.
Base: " Arjuna said, " " This yoga, you are doing, I am not seeing the honey in the suda, I will not move the sati. " " "
5K LoRA: Arjuna said that this is the yoga which you have described. Having said honey with equanimity I do not see this. The position is fixed by being restless.

[30]
Sanskrit: cañcalam hi manaḥ kṛṣṇa pramāthi bala vat dṛḍham tasya aham nigraham manye vāyoḥ iva su duṣkaram
Reference: The mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate and very strong, O Kṛṣṇa, and to subdue it, I think, is more difficult than controlling the wind.
Base: " And his heart was strong and steadfast above Krishna ; and his mind was hard as the wind, and I believed in his subjection. "
5K LoRA: The mind should be as clear as the chanchalā. Kṛṣṇa should be strong and firm. He should be restrained by me. He is as evil as the wind.

[31]
Sanskrit: śrī bhagavān uvāca asaṁśayam mahā bāho manaḥ durnigraham calam abhyāsena tu kaunteya vairāgyeṇa ca gṛhyate
Reference: Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa said: O mighty-armed son of Kuntī, it is undoubtedly very difficult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible by suitable practice and by detachment.
Base: " Shri Bhagwan said, " " " Asamahayama, mahabhauha, baho, mana, malgriha, chalma, chala, konta, vairaga, and raga are taken by practice. " " [ 1 ] "
5K LoRA: The lord Śrī said that the great arm mind misfortune movement and the practice of the practice should be done by the Lord.

[32]
Sanskrit: asaṁyata ātmanā yogaḥ duṣprāpaḥ iti me matiḥ vaśya ātmanā tu yatatā śakyaḥ avāptum upāyataḥ
Reference: For one whose mind is unbridled, self-realization is difficult work. But he whose mind is controlled and who strives by appropriate means is assured of success. That is My opinion.
Base: " I believe that yoga is a sin of the self, not of the impossible. "
5K LoRA: Having considered that yoga is a sinful practice for the sake of the soul one should do whatever is possible for the benefit of the self.

[33]
Sanskrit: arjunaḥ uvāca ayatiḥ śraddhayā upetaḥ yogāt calita mānasaḥ aprāpya yoga saṁsiddhim kām gatim kṛṣṇa gacchati
Reference: Arjuna said: O Kṛṣṇa, what is the destination of the unsuccessful transcendentalist, who in the beginning takes to the process of self-realization with faith but who later desists due to worldly-mindedness and thus does not attain perfection in mysticism?
Base: " Arjuna said, " " " I have faith in you, I have no mind to walk in yoga, I am doing yoga, "
5K LoRA: Arjuna said O Śiva the mind is moved by the practice of yoga and the mind becomes unyouga sāmya siddhi kāma siddha kaṃga and kṛṣṇa goes to the path of Kṛṣa.

[34]
Sanskrit: kaccit na ubhaya vibhraṣṭaḥ chinna abhram iva naśyati apratiṣṭhaḥ mahā bāho vimūḍhaḥ brahmaṇaḥ pathi
Reference: O mighty-armed Kṛṣṇa, does not such a man, who is bewildered from the path of transcendence, fall away from both spiritual and material success and perish like a riven cloud, with no position in any sphere?
Base: " Neither the two bewildered, nor the two broken, nor as the broken, the great, the big, the foolish, the path of Brahman. "
5K LoRA: The two elated ones do not look like the two broken ones and the one who is not standing is the great arm the fool the path of Brahman.

[35]
Sanskrit: etat me saṁśayam kṛṣṇa chettum arhasi aśeṣataḥ tvat anyaḥ saṁśayasya asya chettā na hi upapadyate
Reference: This is my doubt, O Kṛṣṇa, and I ask You to dispel it completely. But for You, no one is to be found who can destroy this doubt.
Base: " For this is my help, and thou shalt not cut off my brother, but thou art the end of the world. "
5K LoRA: This is the one who is the master of the universe. You are the supreme master of all. You do not want to be the master or the master to be destroyed by this universe.

[36]
Sanskrit: śrī bhagavān uvāca pārtha na eva iha na amutra vināśaḥ tasya vidyate na hi kalyāṇa kṛt kaścit durgatim tāta gacchati
Reference: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Son of Pṛthā, a transcendentalist engaged in auspicious activities does not meet with destruction either in this world or in the spiritual world; one who does good, My friend, is never overcome by evil.
Base: " Shri Bhagwan said, There is neither earth nor earth, there is no destruction of the Son, there exists no goodness, there goes no evil. "
5K LoRA: The lord Śrī said Śri is not the soul. He is neither the son of the immortal nor the destroyer. He has no welfare. One who is evil goes there.

[37]
Sanskrit: prāpya puṇya kṛtām lokān uṣitvā śāśvatīḥ samāḥ śucīnām śrī matām gehe yoga bhraṣṭaḥ abhijāyate
Reference: The unsuccessful yogī, after many, many years of enjoyment on the planets of the pious living entities, is born into a family of righteous people, or into a family of rich aristocracy.
Base: " And when he hath received the good, he hid them that were virtuous, and hath kept them clean for ever, and ever, he is found to be corrupt in the faith of the Lord. "
5K LoRA: Having attained the virtuousness of the people one who has attained eternal union with the virtuosity of the pure and the virtues of the srīma is known as the corrupt yogic.

[38]
Sanskrit: atha vā yoginām eva kule bhavati dhī matām etat hi durlabha taram loke janma yat īdṛśam
Reference: Or [if unsuccessful after long practice of yoga] he takes his birth in a family of transcendentalists who are surely great in wisdom. Certainly, such a birth is rare in this world.
Base: " Or, it is said, that the Yogis are the family of the religion, and this is the rare quality of people born into it. "
5K LoRA: The yogin thus becomes the one who is born in the clan. This is the rare quality of the religion.

[39]
Sanskrit: tatra tam buddhi saṁyogam labhate paurva dehikam yatate ca tataḥ bhūyaḥ saṁsiddhau kuru nandana
Reference: On taking such a birth, he revives the divine consciousness of his previous life, and he again tries to make further progress in order to achieve complete success, O son of Kuru.
Base: " Wherein the mind findeth the perfect work of the body : and the earth make the perfect of it. "
5K LoRA: There he finds the intellect and the body in the form of the yogic being. Then the earth becomes the yoga of the body.

[40]
Sanskrit: pūrva abhyāsena tena eva hriyate hi avaśaḥ api saḥ jijñāsuḥ api yogasya śabda brahma ativartate
Reference: By virtue of the divine consciousness of his previous life, he automatically becomes attracted to the yogic principles – even without seeking them. Such an inquisitive transcendentalist stands always above the ritualistic principles of the scriptures.
Base: " By the previous practice, he loses the same, and he becomes inquisitive and the word Brahman of Yoga is changed to Avar. "
5K LoRA: The word Brahman is the highest form of yoga even in the inquisitive and the preceptor is the one who is destroyed by the previous practice.

[41]
Sanskrit: prayatnāt yatamānaḥ tu yogī saṁśuddha kilbiṣaḥ aneka janma saṁsiddhaḥ tataḥ yāti parām gatim
Reference: And when the yogī engages himself with sincere endeavor in making further progress, being washed of all contaminations, then ultimately, achieving perfection after many, many births of practice, he attains the supreme goal.
Base: " By effort the yogi has attained to the perfection of the pure, the perfection which is attained by many births, and thencecece to the next. "
5K LoRA: The yogī should be accomplished by striving for the purification of the body. One should attain many forms of birth. One who attains that is the ultimate goal.

[42]
Sanskrit: tapasvibhyaḥ adhikaḥ yogī jñānibhyaḥ api mataḥ adhikaḥ karmibhyaḥ ca adhikaḥ yogī tasmāt yogī bhava arjuna
Reference: A yogī is greater than the ascetic, greater than the empiricist and greater than the fruitive worker. Therefore, O Arjuna, in all circumstances, be a yogī.
Base: " Say,'More yogis than ascetics, more knowledgeable and virtuous, more workers, more yogic, so be a yogi, Arjuna '. "
5K LoRA: The yogis are more than those who do penance the jnāgīnas are more like the dharma the karmīs are more yogīs.

[43]
Sanskrit: yoginām api sarveṣām mat gatena antaḥ ātmanā śraddhā vān bhajate yaḥ mām saḥ me yukta tamaḥ mataḥ
Reference: And of all yogīs, the one with great faith who always abides in Me, thinks of Me within himself and renders transcendental loving service to Me – he is the most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all. That is My opinion.
Base: " And the yogin also believed that he had in me the spirit, and that he was in me, and in me all things were made. "
5K LoRA: The yoginā also worshipped me with the spirit and reverence in the heart of all beings. He worshipped the me who is me.

[44]
Sanskrit: śrī bhagavān uvāca mayi āsakta manāḥ pārtha yogam yuñjan mat āśrayaḥ asaṁśayam samagram mām yathā jñāsyasi tat śṛṇu
Reference: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Now hear, O son of Pṛthā, how by practicing yoga in full consciousness of Me, with mind attached to Me, you can know Me in full, free from doubt.
Base: " Shri Bhagwan said, " " " If I have a mind attached to you, you must practice Partha Yoga, that I may know the whole meaning of your abode. " "
5K LoRA: The lord said Śrī the Lord said O you who have attached me to the mind you should learn the partha yoga. You will know how to know the whole of me.

[45]
Sanskrit: jñānam te aham sa vijñānam idam vakṣyāmi aśeṣataḥ yat jñātvā na iha bhūyaḥ anyat jñātavyam avaśiṣyate
Reference: I shall now declare unto you in full this knowledge, both phenomenal and numinous. This being known, nothing further shall remain for you to know.
Base: " To them it is written, I speak this science : that they may know no more than this, because they know not the truth. "
5K LoRA: The knowledge is that which is known to them. The knowledge which is not known to the world is that known to others.

[46]
Sanskrit: manuṣyāṇām sahasreṣu kaścit yatati siddhaye yatatām api siddhānām kaścit mām vetti tattvataḥ
Reference: Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth.
Base: " For there is one among men, that is perfect : and there is another that is perfected, that hath called me by reason. "
5K LoRA: One of the seven persons should be called perfect. One of those who is perfect should be known as me.

[47]
Sanskrit: bhūmiḥ āpaḥ analaḥ vāyuḥ kham manaḥ buddhiḥ eva ca ahaṅkāraḥ iti iyam me bhinnā prakṛtiḥ aṣṭadhā
Reference: Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego – all together these eight constitute My separated material energies.
Base: " Bhumi, Apa, Anal, Vayu, Khama, Mana, Budhi, ego, these are the eight elements of the different natures. "
5K LoRA: The earth fire fire and air mind intellect ego ego etc. are the eight different forms of nature.

[48]
Sanskrit: aparā iyam itaḥ tu anyām prakṛtim viddhi me parām jīva bhūtām mahā bāho yayā idam dhāryate jagat
Reference: Besides these, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is another, superior energy of Mine, which comprises the living entities who are exploiting the resources of this material, inferior nature.
Base: " And this is the great arm of the other living entity, the spirit, which in the knowledge of other nature, is the world, which it holds. "
5K LoRA: Then the other nature should be known as the other being. The other beings should be considered as the great beings. The world should be held in its hands.

[49]
Sanskrit: etat yonīni bhūtāni sarvāṇi iti upadhāraya aham kṛtsnasya jagataḥ prabhavaḥ pralayaḥ tathā
Reference: All created beings have their source in these two natures. Of all that is material and all that is spiritual in this world, know for certain that I am both the origin and the dissolution.
Base: " Saying, These are the yoni and the devils ; I am the end of the universe, and I am not the end. "
5K LoRA: Having said this all the yogis and demons should be worshipped.

[50]
Sanskrit: mattaḥ para taram na anyat kiñcit asti dhanam jaya mayi sarvam idam protam sūtre maṇi gaṇāḥ iva
Reference: O conqueror of wealth, there is no truth superior to Me. Everything rests upon Me, as pearls are strung on a thread.
Base: " There is nothing better than the glory of the Lord ; there is nothing more than the riches of the world. I have everything in this proto-sutra. "
5K LoRA: There is nothing more than the quality of the mind than the wealth. The victory of all is in me. It is like the gold in the preceptor's thread.

[51]
Sanskrit: bījam mām sarva bhūtānām viddhi pārtha sanātanam buddhiḥ buddhi matām asmi tejaḥ tejasvinām aham
Reference: O son of Pṛthā, know that I am the original seed of all existences, the intelligence of the intelligent, and the prowess of all powerful men.
Base: " To me belong the seeds of all wisdom ; to me are the eternal wisdom, the eternal understanding, the infinite light. "
5K LoRA: The seed is for me the knowledge of all beings the eternal intellect the intellect and the belief. I am the brilliance of the light.

[52]
Sanskrit: balam bala vatām ca aham kāma rāga vivarjitam dharma aviruddhaḥ bhūteṣu kāmaḥ asmi bharata ṛṣabha
Reference: I am the strength of the strong, devoid of passion and desire. I am sex life which is not contrary to religious principles, O lord of the Bhāratas [Arjuna].
Base: " I am strong and powerful, I am Kama, I have no anger, I do not have any religion, I work with all my heart, "
5K LoRA: The force strength force energy energy and energy are the objects of the universe. The nature of the earth is the object of the demons. The energy of the gods is the subject of the energy.

[53]
Sanskrit: ye ca eva sāttvikāḥ bhāvāḥ rājasāḥ tāmasāḥ ca ye mattaḥ eva iti tān viddhi na tu aham teṣu te mayi
Reference: Know that all states of being – be they of goodness, passion or ignorance – are manifested by My energy. I am, in one sense, everything, but I am independent. I am not under the modes of material nature, for they, on the contrary, are within Me.
Base: " And they that are of good faith, and kings, and scribes, know not that I am the drunkenness ; but that I AM in them. "
5K LoRA: Those who are sattvic noble noble and drunk do not know that I am one of them.

[54]
Sanskrit: daivī hi eṣā guṇa mayī mama māyā duratyayā mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etām taranti te
Reference: This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily cross beyond it.
Base: " These are the divine qualities, which are given unto me by the power of my love, and which float in me. "
5K LoRA: The divine is the quality of me. Those who have given me the illusion of my illusion and who have made me fall asleep are the illusions of me and those who have washed away it.

[55]
Sanskrit: na mām duṣkṛtinaḥ mūḍhāḥ prapadyante nara adhamāḥ māyayā apahṛta jñānāḥ āsuram bhāvam āśritāḥ
Reference: Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, who are lowest among mankind, whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of demons do not surrender unto Me.
Base: " Neither are I visited by the foolish of the wicked, neither by the wicking, neither is I taken captive by the devil ; "
5K LoRA: The fools do not know me. The men who are evil and do not understand me. Those who are misguided and abducted by the illusion of knowledge depend on the spirit of the demons.

[56]
Sanskrit: catuḥ vidhāḥ bhajante mām janāḥ su kṛtinaḥ arjuna ārtaḥ jijñāsuḥ artha arthī jñānī ca bharata ṛṣabha
Reference: O best among the Bhāratas, four kinds of pious men begin to render devotional service unto Me – the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute.
Base: " The four streams are : Arjuna, Artha, Jigyasa, Arthana, Ardh, Arh, Ardha, Arrah, Arsh, Arha, Arr, Arhat, Arsha, Arkh, Argh, Arbh, Arhar, Arshad, Ar
5K LoRA: The four modes of worship are worshipped by me the people the doers Arjuna Artha Arta Jigyāna Arth Art Arti Artra Arrāt Rīṣabha Bharata Jnīkā and

[57]
Sanskrit: teṣām jñānī nitya yuktaḥ eka bhaktiḥ viśiṣyate priyaḥ hi jñāninaḥ atyartham aham saḥ ca mama priyaḥ
Reference: Of these, the one who is in full knowledge and who is always engaged in pure devotional service is the best. For I am very dear to him, and he is dear to Me.
Base: " And theirs shall be a godliness endowed with everlasting wisdom : beloved, I am the very meaning of the wise, and he is my beloved. "
5K LoRA: One who is ever aware of them and has everlasting devotion to them is endowed with the speciality of being beloved. He is the most knowledgeable. He means me and I. He becomes my beloved.

[58]
Sanskrit: udārāḥ sarve eva ete jñānī tu ātmā eva me matam āsthitaḥ saḥ hi yukta ātmā mām eva anuttamām gatim
Reference: All these devotees are undoubtedly magnanimous souls, but he who is situated in knowledge of Me I consider to be just like My own self. Being engaged in My transcendental service, he is sure to attain Me, the highest and most perfect goal.
Base: " The generous are all these, the wise are the spirit, the spirit is my mind ; the spirit which is in me is the best of all movements. "
5K LoRA: All these are liberals wise and selfish. The soul is the religion. The spirit with which he is situated is the best of all.

[59]
Sanskrit: bahūnām janmanām ante jñāna vān mām prapadyate vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti saḥ mahā ātmā su durlabhaḥ
Reference: After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great soul is very rare.
Base: " At the end of many births, knowledge comes to me, Vasudeva is the Supreme Self, the Supreme Being. "
5K LoRA: The great spirit who is the ultimate knowledge of the birth of many people and who is known to me as Vasudeva is the supreme being.

[60]
Sanskrit: kāmaiḥ taiḥ taiḥ hṛta jñānāḥ prapadyante anya devatāḥ tam tam niyamam āsthāya prakṛtyā niyatāḥ svayā
Reference: Those whose intelligence has been stolen by material desires surrender unto demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship according to their own natures.
Base: " By works they have made their hearts wise ; and the other gods have made them to believe in the law of nature, as their own. "
5K LoRA: The other gods would have given him the knowledge of the heart by doing these deeds of his own doing and the rules were prescribed by him for him by the nature.

[61]
Sanskrit: yaḥ yaḥ yām yām tanum bhaktaḥ śraddhayā arcitum icchati tasya tasya acalām śraddhām tām eva vidadhāmi aham
Reference: I am in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul. As soon as one desires to worship some demigod, I make his faith steady so that he can devote himself to that particular deity.
Base: " I say unto him that believeth on me, that he should worship with faith the things which are my God : "
5K LoRA: I shall describe to him the unwavering devotion of any devotee who desires to worship the yama yama and tānu with reverence.

[62]
Sanskrit: saḥ tayā śraddhayā yuktaḥ tasya ārādhanam īhate labhate ca tataḥ kāmān mayā eva vihitān hi tān
Reference: Endowed with such a faith, he endeavors to worship a particular demigod and obtains his desires. But in actuality these benefits are bestowed by Me alone.
Base: " And he hath faith in him, and hath regard to his worship : and these things have I ordained unto him, "
5K LoRA: He finds her full of reverence and worships her. Then he finds her having the desires prescribed by me.

[63]
Sanskrit: anta vat tu phalam teṣām tat bhavati alpa medhasām devān deva yajaḥ yānti mat bhaktāḥ yānti mām api
Reference: Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are limited and temporary. Those who worship the demigods go to the planets of the demigods, but My devotees ultimately reach My supreme planet.
Base: " And the end is that they shall have a fruit, which shall be to me also, and to the gods of the least wisdom, which worship him. "
5K LoRA: The final fruit of those is that which is less than the intellect. The gods and the goddesses go to me.

[64]
Sanskrit: avyaktam vyaktim āpannam manyante mām abuddhayaḥ param bhāvam ajānantaḥ mama avyayam anuttamam
Reference: Unintelligent men, who do not know Me perfectly, think that I, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, was impersonal before and have now assumed this personality. Due to their small knowledge, they do not know My higher nature, which is imperishable and supreme.
Base: " For the invisible man thinketh that he is : and the invisible knoweth me, and knoweth not my inward parts, and despiseth my inmost things. "
5K LoRA: The person who is unmanifest in the unman who is not aware of me is considered to be unmanefest in him.

[65]
Sanskrit: na aham prakāśaḥ sarvasya yoga māyā samāvṛtaḥ mūḍhaḥ ayam na abhijānāti lokaḥ mām ajam avyayam
Reference: I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am covered by My internal potency, and therefore they do not know that I am unborn and infallible.
Base: " Neither do I know the light, nor the darkness, the darkness of the universe, the light of the world, the power of the mind, the mind of the people, the knowledge of the light. "
5K LoRA: The illusion of the world does not know me. The illusory one does not understand me.

[66]
Sanskrit: veda aham samatītāni vartamānāni ca arjuna bhaviṣyāṇi ca bhūtāni mām tu veda na kaścana
Reference: O Arjuna, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I know everything that has happened in the past, all that is happening in the present, and all things that are yet to come. I also know all living entities; but Me no one knows.
Base: " I am the Vedas, the present, the Arjuna, the future, the ghosts, the Veda is not for me. "
5K LoRA: The Vedas are the present and Arjuna the future and the past. The Veda is not the past and the future.

[67]
Sanskrit: icchā dveṣa samutthena dvandva mohena bhārata sarva bhūtāni sammoham sarge yānti param tapa
Reference: O scion of Bharata, O conqueror of the foe, all living entities are born into delusion, bewildered by dualities arisen from desire and hate.
Base: " By will, hatred, and strife, India will be filled with the power of the ghosts. "
5K LoRA: All the demons of India go to heaven with the enchantment of the spirit.

[68]
Sanskrit: yeṣām tu anta gatam pāpam janānām puṇya karmaṇām te dvandva moha nirmuktāḥ bhajante mām dṛḍha vratāḥ
Reference: Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life and whose sinful actions are completely eradicated are freed from the dualities of delusion, and they engage themselves in My service with determination.
Base: " And unto them that are dead, and come to an end, and to them that suffer evil and evil, and are not enticed, give me thanks. "
5K LoRA: Those who have passed away due to the sins of the people and the virtuous deeds of the past are worshipped without the illusion of the illusions.

[69]
Sanskrit: jarā maraṇa mokṣāya mām āśritya yatanti ye te brahma tat viduḥ kṛtsnam adhyātmam karma ca akhilam
Reference: Intelligent persons who are endeavoring for liberation from old age and death take refuge in Me in devotional service. They are actually Brahman because they entirely know everything about transcendental activities.
Base: " For the salvation of death, they depend on me, because they are the Brahman, the whole of creation, the Self, the Karma, the universe. "
5K LoRA: Those who depend on Brahman for salvation the death of the son of Jārā the creation of the universe the spirituality and the action of the whole being.

[70]
Sanskrit: sa adhibhūta adhidaivam mām sa adhiyajñam ca ye viduḥ prayāṇa kāle api ca mām te viduḥ yukta cetasaḥ
Reference: Those in full consciousness of Me, who know Me, the Supreme Lord, to be the governing principle of the material manifestation, of the demigods, and of all methods of sacrifice, can understand and know Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even at the time of death.
Base: " And he gave me this authority, and this authority : and he taught me the things that were before me, and the things which were before my eyes. "
5K LoRA: He who is the master of the universe and who knows me and who is my master is known to me. He who knows the disciples who know me and those who know us in the journey and who know you are aware of me.

[71]
Sanskrit: arjunaḥ uvāca kim tat brahma kim adhyātmam kim karma puruṣa uttama adhibhūtam ca kim proktam adhidaivam kim ucyate
Reference: Arjuna inquired: O my Lord, O Supreme Person, what is Brahman? What is the self? What are fruitive activities? What is this material manifestation? And what are the demigods? Please explain this to me.
Base: " Arjuna asked whether it is called Brahman, Adhyatma, Karma, Purusha, Uttama, Pratyama, Dirkhama or Proktam. "
5K LoRA: Arjuna asked whether it was Brahman spirituality karma purusha good and possessed. What is the preceptor of the universe?

[72]
Sanskrit: adhiyajñaḥ katham kaḥ atra dehe asmin madhusūdana prayāṇa kāle ca katham jñeyaḥ asi niyata ātmabhiḥ
Reference: Who is the Lord of sacrifice, and how does He live in the body, O Madhusūdana? And how can those engaged in devotional service know You at the time of death?
Base: " Adhyagya : One who is the knowledge of the universe, the universe and the universe. "
5K LoRA: The preceptor should know what is here in the body what is Madhusudana in the journey and what is known in the course of the journey.

[73]
Sanskrit: śrī bhagavān uvāca akṣaram brahma paramam svabhāvaḥ adhyātmam ucyate bhūta bhāva udbhava karaḥ visargaḥ karma saṁjñitaḥ
Reference: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The indestructible, transcendental living entity is called Brahman, and his eternal nature is called adhyātma, the self. Action pertaining to the development of the material bodies of the living entities is called karma, or fruitive activities.
Base: " Shri Bhagwan said, " " Brahman is the Supreme Self, the Supreme Nature, the Self, The Spirit, the Spirit, The Viharga, the Viharg, the Karma, the Abode of the Divine. " " "
5K LoRA: The letter ŚrīBhāgavahṇa Brahman the Supreme Being the nature the spirituality the spirit the manifestation the dissolution of the universe and the attainment of the action are known as the manifestations of the spirit.

[74]
Sanskrit: adhibhūtam kṣaraḥ bhāvaḥ puruṣaḥ ca adhidaivatam adhiyajñaḥ aham eva atra dehe deha bhṛtām vara
Reference: O best of the embodied beings, the physical nature, which is constantly changing, is called adhibhūta [the material manifestation]. The universal form of the Lord, which includes all the demigods, like those of the sun and moon, is called adhidaiva. And I, the Supreme Lord, represented as the Supersoul in the heart of every embodied being, am called adhiyajña [the Lord of sacrifice].
Base: " And the body is the same as the body, and the mind is the body ; and the body as the mind, and as the spirit, and so the mind as the intellect, and all that the body contains, is the one who is the Bride of the body. "
5K LoRA: The man should be the master of the body and the man should do the duties of the lord. The lord of the mind should be here.

[75]
Sanskrit: anta kāle ca mām eva smaran muktvā kalevaram yaḥ prayāti saḥ mat bhāvam yāti na asti atra saṁśayaḥ
Reference: And whoever, at the end of his life, quits his body remembering Me alone at once attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt.
Base: " For he that remembereth me in the end, and taketh away my salvation, hath not my spirit with him : but he that is herein is able. "
5K LoRA: He who remembers me in the last hour and liberates me from the evil spirits and tries to attain the goal is not able to attain my feeling.

[76]
Sanskrit: yam yam vā api smaran bhāvam tyajati ante kalevaram tam tam eva eti kaunteya sadā tat bhāva bhāvitaḥ
Reference: Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, O son of Kuntī, that state he will attain without fail.
Base: " Whoever forsakes the memory, calls it that which is at the end of the day, and the feeling is always that which it is. "
5K LoRA: The yama or the yama is remembered and the feeling is given up. The kālāvarā is always called that.

[77]
Sanskrit: tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu mām anusmara yudhya ca mayi arpita manaḥ buddhiḥ mām eva eṣyasi asaṁśayaḥ
Reference: Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Kṛṣṇa and at the same time carry out your prescribed duty of fighting. With your activities dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed on Me, you will attain Me without doubt.
Base: " Therefore I will not walk after thee all the days, and fight against thee, neither shall my heart be able to stand against the same mind which is given me. "
5K LoRA: Then shall you fight me with your mind and mind in all times. You will be able to attain me with the mind and intellect that you have bestowed on me.

[78]
Sanskrit: kavim purāṇam anuśāsitāram aṇoḥ aṇīyāṁsam anusmaret yaḥ sarvasya dhātāram acintya rūpam āditya varṇam tamasaḥ parastāt
Reference: One should meditate upon the Supreme Person as the one who knows everything, as He who is the oldest, who is the controller, who is smaller than the smallest, who is the maintainer of everything, who is beyond all material conception, who is inconceivable, and who is always a person. He is luminous like the sun, and He is transcendental, beyond this material nature.
Base: " Remembering the poet who disciplined the Puranas, and who was able to make an annya, who, not thinking of the mother of all, gave the form of Aditya to Tamas. "
5K LoRA: The poet should be disciplined by the Puranas and the disciple should be remembered as the one who has chosen the form of the god after having thought of the nature of all the elements and who has given the form to the god of all beings.

[79]
Sanskrit: prayāṇa kāle manasā acalena bhaktyā yuktaḥ yoga balena ca eva bhruvoḥ madhye prāṇam āveśya samyak saḥ tam param puruṣam upaiti divyam
Reference: One who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the eyebrows and, by the strength of yoga, with an undeviating mind, engages himself in remembering the Supreme Lord in full devotion, will certainly attain to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Base: " And as he went, the mind was moved, and the mind became devout, and he was moved with the power of yoga, and brought life into the breasts, and overstood them, and was filled with the divine. "
5K LoRA: Having placed the soul in the middle of the forehead with the force of yoga and having devoted the mind to the movement of the journey he is the supreme supreme being.

[80]
Sanskrit: yat akṣaram veda vidaḥ vadanti viśanti yat yatayaḥ vīta rāgāḥ yat icchantaḥ brahma caryam caranti tat te padam saṅgraheṇa pravakṣye
Reference: Persons who are learned in the Vedas, who utter oṁ-kāra, and who are great sages in the renounced order enter into Brahman. Desiring such perfection, one practices celibacy. I shall now briefly explain to you this process by which one may attain salvation.
Base: " The Vedas say that all ragas which are of the nature of Brahma, perform the Brahma chariots of their choice, "
5K LoRA: The scriptures of the Vedas describe the syllables which the raga should chant and the Brahman should chant whatever he wishes.

[81]
Sanskrit: sarva dvārāṇi saṁyamya manaḥ hṛdi nirudhya ca mūrdhni ādhāya ātmanaḥ prāṇam āsthitaḥ yoga dhāraṇām
Reference: The yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual engagements. Closing all the doors of the senses and fixing the mind on the heart and the life air at the top of the head, one establishes himself in yoga.
Base: " And when he had opened all the gates, he closed the mind, and the heart, and departed from the head, and ceased from the spirit, and was in the midst of the body, "
5K LoRA: Having completed all the doors the mind should be restrained by the heart and the soul should be placed in the seat of the soul with the head and the mind standing in the position of the heart.

[82]
Sanskrit: oṁ iti eka akṣaram brahma vyāharan mām anusmaran yaḥ prayāti tyajan deham saḥ yāti paramām gatim
Reference: After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred syllable oṁ, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he will certainly reach the spiritual planets.
Base: " Omiha : One who is the Supreme Being, who is not the only one who is above the body but who is also the ultimate goal of the universe. "
5K LoRA: The one who has left the body and sought to follow me has to enter the supreme course of action with the syllable obhymī the Brahman.

[83]
Sanskrit: ananya cetāḥ satatam yaḥ mām smarati nityaśaḥ tasya aham su labhaḥ pārtha nitya yuktasya yoginaḥ
Reference: For one who always remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain, O son of Pṛthā, because of his constant engagement in devotional service.
Base: " He that remembereth me continually, and in time past, I shall be his bread ; and he that is of the earth, and of the world, he is a yogin. "
5K LoRA: The one who remembers me always with his own mind and who is always with me always has good fortune.

[84]
Sanskrit: mām upetya punaḥ janma duḥkha ālayam aśāśvatam na āpnuvanti mahā ātmānaḥ saṁsiddhim paramām gatāḥ
Reference: After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogīs in devotion, never return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they have attained the highest perfection.
Base: " For I am born again, and the temple of sorrow is not, that they should not receive the glory of the great Spirit, and that they might be made perfect in him. "
5K LoRA: Having left me they again go to the temple of sorrow sorrow and misery. They do not accept the great spirit. They attain the supreme attainment.

[85]
Sanskrit: ā brahma bhuvanāt lokāḥ punaḥ āvartinaḥ arjuna mām upetya tu kaunteya punaḥ janma na vidyate
Reference: From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all are places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place. But one who attains to My abode, O son of Kuntī, never takes birth again.
Base: " O Brahma, from the earth, people again and again, Arjuna left me and said, There is no birth again. "
5K LoRA: O Brahman the people of the earth again and again and Arjuna again and once again left me and said to me There is no birth again.

[86]
Sanskrit: sahasra yuga paryantam ahaḥ yat brahmaṇaḥ viduḥ rātrim yuga sahasra antām te ahaḥ rātra vidaḥ janāḥ
Reference: By human calculation, a thousand ages taken together form the duration of Brahmā’s one day. And such also is the duration of his night.
Base: " From the thousand ages, the Brahmanas have been the night, the Yuga the thousand years, the Anta the night and the people. "
5K LoRA: The Brahman who is the supreme till the thousand yugas and the night who is also the yuga sahasa and the end of the yuga is the great night.

[87]
Sanskrit: avyaktāt vyaktayaḥ sarvāḥ prabhavanti ahaḥ āgame rātri āgame pralīyante tatra eva avyakta saṁjñake
Reference: At the beginning of Brahmā’s day, all living entities become manifest from the unmanifest state, and thereafter, when the night falls, they are merged into the unmanifest again.
Base: " For the things that are not known, are not revealed, but are revealed in the night, when the night cometh, and the day cometh. "
5K LoRA: The manifestations of the manifestations are revealed by the manifestation of the unmanifest in the coming of the ego and the manifesting in the night and the coming thereof.

[88]
Sanskrit: bhūta grāmaḥ saḥ eva ayam bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate rātri āgame avaśaḥ pārtha prabhavati ahaḥ āgame
Reference: Again and again, when Brahmā’s day arrives, all living entities come into being, and with the arrival of Brahmā’s night they are helplessly annihilated.
Base: " And the ghost of the village, being this, came forth, and came into the night, and entered into the earth, and was come into the sea, and dwelt therein : "
5K LoRA: The village of Bhūtā is the one who becomes this and becomes the preceptor. The night comes and the earth comes and comes and becomes a part of the body.

[89]
Sanskrit: paraḥ tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ avyaktaḥ avyaktāt sanātanaḥ yaḥ saḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu naśyatsu na vinaśyati
Reference: Yet there is another unmanifest nature, which is eternal and is transcendental to this manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is never annihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that part remains as it is.
Base: " But the spirit, which is not of the past, is not perishable, which was perisheth from all the devils, which are eternal, which were not manifest. "
5K LoRA: Then the spirit is another manifestation of the manifestation. The eternal one who is not manifest is the one who has destroyed all the demons and is not destroyed.

[90]
Sanskrit: avyaktaḥ akṣaraḥ iti uktaḥ tam āhuḥ paramām gatim yam prāpya na nivartante tat dhāma paramam mama
Reference: That which the Vedāntists describe as unmanifest and infallible, that which is known as the supreme destination, that place from which, having attained it, one never returns – that is My supreme abode.
Base: " Avyaktah : One who is called the Avyakshatra, because he is the ultimate, the highest, the abode of the Supreme Being, who never fails to attain the ultimate speed. "
5K LoRA: The letter  is said to be the undefined letter. The path of the Supreme Being is said as the highest. The one who does not attain the highest point is called the supreme abode.

[91]
Sanskrit: puruṣaḥ saḥ paraḥ pārtha bhaktyā labhyaḥ tu ananyayā yasya antaḥ sthāni bhūtāni yena sarvam idam tatam
Reference: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than all, is attainable by unalloyed devotion. Although He is present in His abode, He is all-pervading, and everything is situated within Him.
Base: " But the spirit which is in him is not of the male, but of the female : for this is the end of all things. "
5K LoRA: The man should be worshipped above that and above that. He should be known as the one who has the demons within him.

[92]
Sanskrit: agniḥ jyotiḥ ahaḥ śuklaḥ ṣaṭ māsāḥ uttara ayanam tatra prayātāḥ gacchanti brahma brahma vidaḥ janāḥ
Reference: Those who know the Supreme Brahman attain that Supreme by passing away from the world during the influence of the fiery god, in the light, at an auspicious moment of the day, during the fortnight of the waxing moon, or during the six months when the sun travels in the north.
Base: " Fire, light, fire, fire and fire, six months after Shukla, they go there in the northern solstice. "
5K LoRA: The fire the flame the fire Śukla the sun the north the south the east the west the Brahmā the Brahman the disciple and the people go there after having made efforts.

[93]
Sanskrit: dhūmaḥ rātriḥ tathā kṛṣṇaḥ ṣaṭ māsāḥ dakṣiṇa ayanam tatra cāndramasam jyotiḥ yogī prāpya nivartate
Reference: The mystic who passes away from this world during the smoke, the night, the fortnight of the waning moon, or the six months when the sun passes to the south reaches the moon planet but again comes back.
Base: " Dhoom is the night and Krishna is the rightful solstice for six months. The moon and moon are illuminated by the yogi. "
5K LoRA: The sun is the night of Dhum and Kṛṣṇa is the southern solstice for six months. The moon and the moon are the lights in the sun.

[94]
Sanskrit: śukla kṛṣṇe gatī hi ete jagataḥ śāśvate mate ekayā yāti anāvṛttim anyayā āvartate punaḥ
Reference: According to Vedic opinion, there are two ways of passing from this world – one in light and one in darkness. When one passes in light, he does not come back; but when one passes in darkness, he returns.
Base: " Shukla Krishna is the speed at which the worlds are eternal, one unfolding and another repeating. "
5K LoRA: The earth is the speed of the sun in the form of the Śukla Kṛṣṇa and the universe is eternal. The manifestation is repeated in another form.

[95]
Sanskrit: na ete sṛtī pārtha jānan yogī muhyati kaścana tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu yoga yuktaḥ bhava arjuna
Reference: Although the devotees know these two paths, O Arjuna, they are never bewildered. Therefore be always fixed in devotion.
Base: " Nor do these sruti-partah-jnanas give yogis, that is, that they may be endowed with yoga at all times. "
5K LoRA: One who knows these three parts of the earth and who gives him yogis is thus the one who has made yogic union for all periods.

[96]
Sanskrit: vedeṣu yajñeṣu tapaḥsu ca eva dāneṣu yat puṇya phalam pradiṣṭam atyeti tat sarvam idam viditvā yogī param sthānam upaiti ca ādyam
Reference: A person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of the results derived from studying the Vedas, performing sacrifices, undergoing austerities, giving charity or pursuing philosophical and fruitive activities. Simply by performing devotional service, he attains all these, and at the end he reaches the supreme eternal abode.
Base: " Knowing the goodness of the fruits of the Vedas, sacrifices and penances, the yogi is endowed with the highest attainable attainable status. "
5K LoRA: Having known all the virtuous fruits mentioned in the Vedas sacrifices penance etc. and the gifts themselves the yogin should preferably use the highest place.

[97]
Sanskrit: śrī bhagavān uvāca idam tu te guhya tamam pravakṣyāmi anasūyave jñānam vijñāna sahitam yat jñātvā mokṣyase aśubhāt
Reference: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, because you are never envious of Me, I shall impart to you this most confidential knowledge and realization, knowing which you shall be relieved of the miseries of material existence.
Base: " And the Lord said unto him, This is the secret of the Lord, that he may reveal unto you the knowledge of the world, and the knowledge that is with it, and that which is not good. "
5K LoRA: The lord said Śrī the lord said to him O Lord you have to go into the cave and find out what is good and what is bad.

[98]
Sanskrit: aśraddadhānāḥ puruṣāḥ dharmasya asya param tapa aprāpya mām nivartante mṛtyu saṁsāra vartmani
Reference: Those who are not faithful in this devotional service cannot attain Me, O conqueror of enemies. Therefore they return to the path of birth and death in this material world.
Base: " But men that are unbelieving, and do not have patience with this religion, turn not away from me, and die, and be not consumed. "
5K LoRA: The men who have done the unspeakable duty of the lord should return to me after having attained penance beyond this dharma and thus attain death.

[99]
Sanskrit: mayā tatam idam sarvam jagat avyakta mūrtinā mat sthāni sarva bhūtāni na ca aham teṣu avasthitaḥ
Reference: By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are in Me, but I am not in them.
Base: " And I said unto him, These are not devils, but all things that are in me, and all things are in hidden idols. "
5K LoRA: I have said these things to him. All the worlds are here with the manifest image of me. All devils are there in me. I am not there in them.

[100]
Sanskrit: na ca mat sthāni bhūtāni paśya me yogam aiśvaram bhūta bhṛt na ca bhūta sthaḥ mama ātmā bhūta bhāvanaḥ
Reference: And yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My mystic opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities and although I am everywhere, I am not a part of this cosmic manifestation, for My Self is the very source of creation.
Base: " Neither see the devils that are in me : I am a yoga, and have no spirit, neither am I a ghost : my spirit is a spirit, and I am not a spirit. "
5K LoRA: Neither do I see the ghosts standing therein. I see yoga the rich ghost the ghost not the ghost. My soul is the spirit.
